# Blockchain Project
This is the specialization project source code for my 6th semester, Cyber Security (adv). The goal of the project is to develop a fully functional and secure blockchain. There will be several subprojects within this repository. Filestructure is as follows:

```
- blockchain-cli [CLI sub-project]
    - src   | source code
    - dist  | binaries
```

## Block Chain Basics

- a blockchain consists of connected blocks
- every block contains specific information (usually transaction related) as well as a reference to the previous block (usually a hash)
- blocks can be validated and added to the chain through completing complex algorithms (proof of work)
- no central network for data; the entire blockchain is stored on every node (a group of computers usually), known as peer-to-peer network

### Hash Functions

Definition: *a mathematical algorithm that maps data of arbitrary size to a bit string of a fixed size and is a one-way function, that is, a function which is practically infeasible to invert*

- the **data** = the '**message**'
- **data** is mapped to a single bit string = the '**hash value**' / '**hash**' / '**message digest**'

Knowing the hash function, it is easy to verify that the input data maps to a given hash value, thus hash strings of blocks in a blockchain can be easily checked to see if they map to the correct data that that block should contain. The reverse however, is hard to do, hence why hash functions are perfect for usage in blockchains.

Encryption is simply a function that takes in a value and applies a secret key (a parameter) to return an encrypted value. Using that same secret key will decrypt the encrypted value back to the original value.

Hashing can not be reversed to reveal the original value, however, it always produces the same hash value if the same input is provided. The more complex a hashing algorithm, the lower the probability of more than one input providing the same hash (something you absolutely do not want in production). This is also known as **collision**. Most production-ready hashes such as SHA are essentially collision resistant. An example of a hash that is not collision resistant is demonstrated below:

```ts
function hashValue(password: number): number{ // input value
 
  const hash =  10 + (password % 2); // hash function
 
  console.log(`Original Password: ${password} --> Hashed Value: ${hash}`); // output (hashed) value
 
  return hash;
}
```

Here are examples of values that give the same hash with the following function ```hashValue()``` even though the input value was different:

```ts
Original Password: 4    -->   Hashed Value: 10
Original Password: 8    -->   Hashed Value: 10
Original Password: 32   -->   Hashed Value: 10
Original Password: 800  -->   Hashed Value: 10
```

This is a clear demonstration of collision taking place. If the above function was used in our blockchain, criminals could very easily defraud the chain by replacing blocks with fraudulent content that produces the same hash as the legitamate block (in our case, simply any even number). Some popular collision resistant hashing algorithms that we could use include:

- SHA-256
- SHA-512
- SHA-3
- BLAKE2s
- BLAKE2b
- MD2

The reason most of these are collision resistant is simply because the hash generated by the function created 2^256 possible combinations. For reference, that is more than the total number of grains of sands in the world!

A basic SHA-256 hash of the value "*hello world*" produces the following hash: **b94d27b9934d3e08a52e52d7da7dabfac484efe37a5380ee9088f7ace2efcde9**.

## Blockchain Blocks

Blocks usually contain:

- index (think of database primary keys)
- app-related data
- creation timestamp
- hash value (reference for future block)
- hash value of previous block (link to previous block)

The first block in a blockchain does not have a hash value for a previous block (field is usually empty string ```""```) and is known as the *genesis block*. Below are some examples of basic blocks:

```json
{
    "blocks": [
        {
            "id": 0,
            "timeStamp": "4-8-2022 11:0:23", 
            "data": "Genesis Block",
            "hash": "89eb0ac031a63d2421cd05a2fbe41f3ea35f5c3712ca839cbf6b85c4ee07b7a3",
            "previousHash": ""
        },
        {
            "id": 1,
            "timeStamp": "4-8-2022 11:15:38",
            "data": "John paid Oliver $20.",
            "hash": "1082573a933a0089ded219847c9f49a11b621471d57d083d1b63dfb58fc3d3b0",
            "previousHash": "89eb0ac031a63d2421cd05a2fbe41f3ea35f5c3712ca839cbf6b85c4ee07b7a3"
        },
        {
            "id": 2,
            "timeStamp": "4-8-2022 11:23:47",
            "data": "Jack paid Jacob $25.",
            "hash": "5fa522ae07f540e3d8dfbcbe2a904f51fcc5e6cfa2c6fcb6446eef6cfde8005c",
            "previousHash": "1082573a933a0089ded219847c9f49a11b621471d57d083d1b63dfb58fc3d3b0"
        }
    ]
}
```
*For simplicity we note the timestamps here in a human-readable string format, however usually, an integer would be used for this.*

If a criminal is able to recreate all three blocks in subsequent order with the same hashes but different data (such as ```"John paid Oliver $2000"``` for the second block) then that would be a succesful defraud. To prevent this from happening, a blockchain requires algorithms to be solved which takes time and resources. This work that is done to find the next block in the chain through solving the algorithm is what is known as block mining.

## Block Mining

Even though the value of cryptocurrencies is related to the usage of that currency in every day life as well as it's supply, the incentive for miners to solve the math problems required by a particular blockchain also determines this value. Usually blocks need to be aproved by other miners, thus the more people mining in a blockchain, the more secure it becomes.

Usually, blocks in a blockchain require the hashes to start with specific values, such as several 0s. You need to include the data of the transactions plus a custom added value to later the hash to produce the 0s at the start. For example, *Bitcoin* currently needs 19 0s at the start of a block for that block to be valuable. The more 0s needed at the start, the harder the block is to mine. For the sake of simplicity, lets say our blockchain needs the hash of the block to start with ```0000```:

#### Simplified Block:
```json
{
    "id": 3,
    "timeStamp": "23-11-2022 15:13:27",
    "data": "John paid Ben $15.",
    "hash": "f751d556018521c65e05a8560599842523f24195c1dc7e83f043c6d9190639e3",
    "previousHash": "5fa522ae07f540e3d8dfbcbe2a904f51fcc5e6cfa2c6fcb6446eef6cfde8005c"
}
```

The hash of the block does not start with ```0000```, thus it is not valid. For the sake of argument, lets say adding ```23762``` to the end of the data suddenly generates a hash that starts with ```0000```:  
```John paid Ben $15.23762 -> 00008a2fcae4ed68ff9ca2b2e85a4256ae103fa11dc0e3461ee63a255be9f6b2```

This appended special value that we found is called a *nonce* and every block involves miners calculating what this nonce value could be to validate the block to start with the 0s. Finding this nonce is used as a *proof of work*.

### The Zeroes

The number of miners partaking in a blockchain directly determines how many zeroes are required in the hashed value of a block. This is because a blockchain wants to keep a systematic rate of new blocks being added to the chain for security reasons (roughly a block every 10/15 minutes is a good rate). The reason for this is so that every block can be checked in due time while still not taking too long to verify existing transactions and add another block to the chain to keep the cryptocurrency end-users happy. Furthermore, it is important to note that in real blockchains, usually each block concatenate several transactions (around 2500 per block) for efficiency reasons.